Soil Sampling Guide
Maximizing productivity is a fact of life in agriculture. The demand for high yields, top quality and environmental
stewardship will always be a driving factor. Unfortunately good yields and top quality don’t happen automatically.
However, there are tools available to guide you toward these goals in a reliable manner. Soil analysis is the first building
block in a sound fertility program. Soil reports should always be used with other information as a guide in arriving at
fertilizer and lime recommendations which will help the grower attain their crop yield and quality goals.
How to Take Soil Samples
Important: Accurate soil analysis with meaningful interpretation requires properly taken samples. Follow all directions
carefully and correctly. Sampling technique presents the greatest chance for errors in results. Laboratory analytic work will
not improve the accuracy of a sample that does not represent the area.
1. Select the Proper Equipment
Collect samples using chrome plated or stainless steel
sampling tubes or augers. A clean spade or shovel can
also be used. Avoid galvanized, bronze or brass tools.
Use clean, plastic buckets. Do not use galvanized or
rubber buckets, as they will contaminate the samples.
(Figure 1)
2. When to Take Samples
Sampling can take place during any period of the year.
However, it is best to sample a field at about the same
time of year. Wait a minimum of thirty days to sample
after applications of fertilizer, lime, or sulfur.
3. Sample Area
Samples must be representative of the area you are
treating. Most often, sampling by soil color is an
acceptable method for dividing large fields into “like”
areas. County ASCS aerial photographs can be used as
a guide. Areas that differ in slope, drainage, past
treatment, etc. should be sampled separately (fig. 2).
Sampling across dissimilar soil types is not
recommended. And finally, the sample area should be
large enough for special lime or fertilizer treatments.
Always remember to remove any surface debris prior
to sampling.
Do Not Sample:
• Dead or back furrows.
• Fence rows, old or new.
• Old roadbeds, or near limestone gravel roads.
• Terrace channels.
• Wind breaks or snow fence lines.
• Turn-rows.
• Spill areas.
• Fertilizer bands including Anhydrous N.
• Unusual or abnormal spots.
4. Sample Depth
Refer to Table 1 on page 2 for the correct sampling
depth. Sampling depth must remain consistent because
many soils are stratified and variation in depth will
introduce errors into the analytic results.
To test for soil stratification, sample through the soil
profile, separately, 0” to 2”, 2” to 4”, 4” to 6”, and 6”
to 8”. Remember to take the recommended number of
cores per sample. The greater the difference in the
analytic data between samples, the greater the degree
of stratification.
5. Number of Cores and Acres per Sample
Various studies have shown that proper sampling
requires at least 10 core per sample, and sometimes 15
or more cores, depending on the nature of the soil and
the size of the area being sampled. A smaller number
can introduce variability into the results from different
sampling years. There is no rule for the number of
acres to include in a single sample. This must depend
on the local situation. However, the University of
Illinois has long recommended that a single sample
should represent no more than 5 acres. Very small
sampling areas, such as residential landscape plants
and some small gardens may use fewer cores per
sample.
Rev. 09-2010
6. Preparing Samples for Shipment
Thoroughly mix the randomly taken core samples in a
plastic bucket and remove a separate, well-mixed
composite sample (½ to 1 pint) from the mixture.
Place it into the lab’s sample bag, filling it to the
“line.” New plastic sandwich bags can be substituted.
Make sure to double bag these types of bags. All
samples taken for Nitrogen analyses should be
immediately air-dried, shipped early in the week, or
shipped frozen.
Once the sample is in the bag, fold the top down to
exclude air and roll it down to close and fold the tabs.
Write your sample ID designation (include grid sub
sample identification where applicable) and your
customer’s name on the bag where requested.
7. Completing the Information Form
On the Information Form record the same sample, and
sub-sample IDs, and the customer name with the
address. In the indicated area include your business
name and address. Complete all the remaining
information as required.
8. Mailing the Sample
Spectrum provides the shipping containers (at a
nominal fee) but other boxes may be used. A strong
envelope may be used when shipping only a few
samples.
Table 1: Depth to Sample
Type of Sample Sample Depth Misc. Notes
Conventional Tillage 7” Sampling depth must remain constant.
Strip/Band Fertilization (known) 7” See Figure 4 for instructions.
Strip/Band Fertilization (unknown) 7” Take 20+ random samples 90° to band rows.
Reduced Tillage or No-Till 2” and 7” 2” sample is for surface pH determinations.
Orchards and other trees 7” Take samples inside the “drip line” (Figure 3)
Lawn/Turf 4” Remove the sod piece from each core sample.
Pasture 4” Remove the sod piece from each core sample.
Special Problem Solving 7” and 36” Take 7” sample and 36” sample from the “same hole”
Pre Sidedress Nitrogen Test 12” Take samples when corn is 10” to 12 “ tall.
Soil Nitrogen Tests 12” to 36” Drier climate soils require the taking of deeper samples.
Soybean Cyst Nematode Samples 7” Sample near planted row, in fringe of damaged areas. 

FOR TESTING 
Soil Testing and Sample Collection
Soil testing is one of the best ways to begin understanding the levels of nutrients available to plants in the
soil and what fertilizers are required to keep your plants healthy.
You can get your soil tested through University of Missouri Extension. Click here for a flyer that gives you
sample collection information, drop-off locations in St. Louis and the fee for a basic test.
For most gardeners, a soil test taken every 3 years may be all that is needed to keep abreast with changes
in nutrient levels and soil conditions. Where gardeners have problems that are considered unusual and not
traceable to weather extremes or pests, a soil test is the best approach to begin understanding the problem.
More frequent testing of soils may also be appropriate where fruit production is substantial as in the case
of vegetable gardens, small fruits and tree fruits.
At the very least, soil tests should give you 4 basic pieces of information; 1) level of acidity/alkalinity,
otherwise measured as pH; 2) phosphorous content; 3) potassium content and 4) percentage of organic
matter. Two other elements are commonly evaluated; calcium and magnesium. It is rare that either of these
elements are lacking in the soil. However, their measurements will allow some interpretation of how well
your soil can serve as a storage reserve of important nutrients. In the case of calcium, it is also an indicator
of whether lime has been used to adjust the soil acidity. Over liming soils is one of the most common
mistakes in attempting to improve growing conditions.
In some cases, it may be helpful to run a complete analysis of all major and minor elements to gain some
insight into the total profile of nutrients available to the plant. This is rarely needed, however, at times it is
useful especially where problems reoccur and no other explanation can be found.
Sample Collection
Start with a clean bucket or other container for collecting the soil sample. Useful tools would include a soil
probe, soil auger, a trowel or a garden spade and a bucket.
Sampling in a systematic manner is very important to obtain reliable results. Samples can be collected at
any time of year, however, it is best to do this in the late summer or fall preceding the next growing season
before soil temperatures drop below 50 degrees. This allow some time to work the soil, adjust the soil
acidity/alkalinity (pH) and add organic materials if needed. Organic matter will continue to decompose in
the soil over the winter and work up nicely next spring when the bed is turned over and prepared for
planting. It also allows time for nutrients in the organic material to leach out so that some nutrient benefit
is gained.
Sampling Area
Where to sample and how many samples to take depends upon the area and variation in soil types. If the
area is considered to be fairly uniform, collect soil samples in a random manner from several sites.
Generally, it is sufficient to collect 3 to 5 samples for every 2000 square feet and mix them into a bucket to
form 1 composite sample. This accommodates most medium sized vegetable gardens, flower and landscape
beds. For lawns, collect one composite sample from the front yard and one from the backyard. If these
areas are larger than 5,000 square feet, then collect an additional composite sample for every 5,000 square
feet. Sampling soils around trees and large shrubs should be done so that the sample is collected in the zone
of actively feeding roots. Generally, this occurs at the drip line of the outermost branches.
If soil types differ or plant performance is questionable, sample these areas separately. Soil sample results
should be interpreted independently for these sites because special treatments may be necessary.
How to Collect a Soil Sample
The depth of which you collect the sample should be in regard to the crop you wish to plant or grow. For
general beds which are to be planted with annuals and perennials, samples should be collected at the 6 to
8-inch depth. For turfgrass, samples should be collected at the 3-inch depth. Sampling depth should be 6 to
10 inches in a vegetable bed.
The sampling procedure is simple. Make a hole to the proper depth for the crop being grown with a trowel
or spade. Slice a thin wedge of the soil down one side and deposit this into the bucket removing any leaves,
roots or other organic materials. Similar samples should be collected from 3 to 5 sites in a 2,000 square foot
area and the final sample should be a single composite mixture of all samples. This is done by blending the
samples together then drawing out about 2 cups of soil. Next, let the sample air dry by spreading it out on a
piece of paper for several days. Do not heat the sample.
Packaging and Mailing
The sample to submit should roughly equal 2 cups in its air dried form. This can be placed in a paper soilsampling bag, plastic tub or a double-lined plastic bag. Each container should be marked clearly with your
name, a sample number and crop to be grown. You may also wish to describe what fertilizer practices have
been preformed during the previous season. Next, fill out a soil-sampling sheet noting the sample number
and a brief description of sampled area. It may be most useful to map the sampling area for quick reference
when the results are received.